It is an amazing historical thing that two and half thousand years later we still have pretty much what the Buddha talked about.

So what they can actually do for us? And what is their place in the Buddhist practice?

My idea here is to hopefully encourage some of you to actually start looking at those Suttas and get some inspiration from the words of the Buddha himself. 

As far as I'm concerned this is actually very important part of the Buddhist path. 

During my life as a monk I have been travelling and have seen quite a lot of the Buddhist world. And one thing that you realize when you travel around is that the talks people listen to and the teachings that people read are almost always from this teacher, or that monk, or this nun, or this lay teacher.

There are all these traditions out there, and everybody is practicing these different systems of thought, and following a particular teacher, but how often do you hear anybody say simply that I practice the Buddha's tradition and that's all there's to it?

Nobody says that! 

Everybody has some kind of other tradition that their practicing. Sometimes it's the Tibetan tradition, sometimes it's the mahayana tradition sometimes it's some kind of sub-tradition within theravada. But very, very rarely is it actually the word of the Buddha himself. 

These traditions may have a lot of good things in them, but the point is, that you can never really know with
absolute certainty how accurately they reflect the word of the Buddha. That is unless you read them for yourself and you find out what is actually going on in those suttas.

Suttas have been available for a short time

I think there is a good reason, why people tend to go to all these different traditions rather than going to the word of the Buddha. 

The reason for that is a historical one: the suttas have only existed in the pali language or
even sanskrit languages up until very recently.

Before they were translated into modern languages nobody could actually read them except a very small group of specialist monks and nuns. 

So these suttas were only accessible to this tiny little group of elitist monks and nuns, around monasteries in Asia. Apart from that nobody had direct access to these teachings.

And if you were lay person or if you were a monastic who didn't understand pali, you had to rely on these other experts
to actually be able to understand the word of the Buddha.

But the Buddha himself said that the Dhamma should be taught in the local language of people. 

So when the Dhamma comes to Australia, it should be taught in english when it goes to Thailand, it should be taught in thai, when it goes to China in chinese, when it goes to Finland it should be taught in Finnish.

It should be taught in whatever lanuage is spoken, so that people can understand what the Buddha actually taught. This is one of the foundational things in the Buddhist practice
yet we had gone so far away from that foundational thing that until very recently people have had no direct access to these suttas at all. 

Even if you look at some of the first translations that were done into English about a 100 years ago they had this victorian feeling to them. It wasn't really english, it was some kind of Shakesperian thing some times, and that is
unfortunate because that's not how the Buddha taught, he taught in the contemporary language of the day in India.

Fortunately now we have very good, reliable and easy to read translations in the modern Engligh. 

For that reason we should take the opportunity now that these suttas are available, to try to access those suttas and see what it was that
The Buddha taught.

Relying in teachers can be dangerous

That is one leg Buddhism sort of stands on, the Suttas.

The second one is that you find that people today who practice these teachings and actually attains or they seem to attain some of the results.

It's very important to have teachers. It's very useful to have somebody you feel has understood things.


It can be very dangerous to rely on an individual teacher.

Often teachers may seem very inspiring in the beginning, they can be very charismatic and they have a lot of metta perhaps. 

It's almost like a magnet to people, people get drawn into these teachers. 

Then it turns out that even though they have these external charismatic appearance, when it comes to the internal qualities they are not as solid as people think they are. 

And then they start doing crazy things like as monastics having relationships with other people. If it isn't that bad  they start sliding into all kind of luxury and things which are unseemly for a monastic. 

Of course when this happens people who think they have faith in something which is Buddhism, get very disappointed and sometimes they lose their faith. They lose their willingness to practice and they throw out the whole baby with the bath water, because they think Buddhism is some kind of corrupt religion which is no good for anybody. 

That is what can happen when you rely
on an individual teacher to teach you rather than the Buddha himself. 

And sometimes it's not as if the teacher
goes completely berserk and does wild things, sometimes it's simply that the teacher is teaching something which isn't quite in accordance with the way the Buddha taught. The teacher may think in a way which is slightly different, maybe
not leading exactly in the same way. 

Then the teacher doesn't actually take you on exactly the same path that the Buddha taught, they don't take you to the same states of deep peace and bliss that the Buddha said are available for people. The teachings don't go to the same goal that the Buddha talked about. 

That again is a much more subtle difficulty
and it is difficult sometimes to know whether the teacher is teaching the right path.

The only way you can know that is by going back to the word of the Buddha and using that as your foundation stone. 
 

Where is the real refuge?

 Nowhere does the Buddha say that we should go for refuge to individual people, that we should take an individual person as our teacher and place all our confidence in that person. 

In fact, that is against the idea of Buddhist refuge. Buddhist refuge is always the refuge in the triple gem:
the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, that is the real refuge. 

And what does that mean?

First of all, the idea of refuge simply means that there is a place that we can go, a place where we can ask questions, a place where we can seek solutions to problems in life. We are all going to have problems from time to time, and it's wonderful to have a source of wisdom and inspiring teachings  which can help us when problems arise.

Not only that but they can also help us to actually improve our lives, even if we already have a pretty good life.
It can always be better. It's not as if anybody doesn't want to be more at peace, more contented more happy in their life, we all want that.

If we find a teaching which can help us with that of course that is what we should be doing. The point here is that, the refuge here is the Buddha, Dhamma and the Sangha. 

The Buddha is the historical Buddha that lived two and half thousand years ago and you cannot go to the Buddha now.

Instead we go to his teachings and this is the Dhamma, so that is where we go for refuge. So both the Buddha and the Dhamma comes around this one thing, which are the Suttas that are available today. This is where the refuge is now, both
the Buddha refuge and the Dhammma refuge are found in those suttas. 

We are then left with the third refuge which is the Sangha.

Now the Sangha is usually known as the monastic commmunity. It's a community as a whole that you take refuge in
because that community is the carrier of Buddhism traditionally. So this is the community which normally specializes in Buddhism.

Just as if you feel ill, you go to the doctor you don't go to the plumber. In the same way if you have a spiritual problem, you go to the Sangha rather than somewhere else. 

The Sangha specializes in these teachings and practices to the best of their ability

The main reason why that monastic Sangha is so powerful is because it's within that Sangha your supposed to find the noble ones. 

They are the ones who have practiced the teachings to the point where they understand the teaching of the Buddha. So in a sense that is where you find your refuge, in the noble Sangha. 

And because they have realized the teachings of the Buddha, their teachings are
exactly the same as the teachings of the Buddha. They use their own words and phrases, they may explain it in a different way from what you are used to, but it points back to the same source, the same Dhamma.

So that whole triple gem we go for refuge to points in one direction: to
the Suttas, to these beautiful teachings that we have available from the Buddha.
