One way or the other we're going to meet suffering in our livess, it's inevitable. And I think most of us
including me are here because we have experienced some form of suffering. 

It is quite a loaded word perhaps but suffering can include anything from being slightly disappointed with life or with yourself or with a friend, or situation in your life, to a downright suffering of illness and losing loved ones, divorce,
separation.

So all this suffering when things go wrong I'm sure we're all familiar with. But the Buddhist teaching has an extraordinarily positive message. 

The Buddha says that he teaches only two things: suffering and the end of suffering. The important point there is the end. 

And yet he says that it's not possible to find the end without understanding what suffering really means. That means the nature of it, the scope, the breadth and also what to do with that suffering. 

We're not just destined to sit with it and grit our teeth or grin and bare it as they say in England, stiff upper lip.

There's actually meaning to it and something that can be done to help us deepen our compassion and our wisdom. And this is why it's such a wonderful message.

I borrowed the title of the day's talk from Venerable Tich Nhat Hanh, who was a very famous Vietnamese monk who spent his whole life serving others and teaching the message of peace. He used this beautiful phrase "no mud no Lotus" 

Which is really beautiful because it shows how the deeper we can put our roots down and feel into that suffering, the more we can use it as a kind of fertilizer for everything that's beautiful in the human heart. 

I think this is especially possible when we stop personalizing the suffering and start to see it as something universal. A universal predicament that we share and that we
can actually help one another with.

So it's the core thread of the Buddha's teaching and also the purpose that people like myself go
forth. In the ordination chanting when we take ordination we ask our preceptor please give me the going forth to understand and become free from all suffering.

And in the Buddhist text it says time and again that all beings recoil from pain and desire their own
happiness. So it's a basic human preoccupation really: happiness with the ending of suffering.

Yet often we don't know how to define either happiness or suffering and we're looking for happiness quite often in the wrong place.

Ajahn Chah, who was my teacher's teacher, said its like when we have itch in our bum and we scratch our head. We're  looking in the wrong place for the happiness and we're looking to relieve the suffering in the wrong place as well. 

We're trying to fix things up outside and of course to some extent we have to try. We live in society there are problems that are collective that it's important be engaged as much as your capacity allows.

But also recognizing that we can only really attend to the cause of suffering within ourself. If we neglect that we
become quite inefficient in our work. We can't really
promote peace if we don't understand where peace comes from and how it arises inside.

We can't really try to alleviate other people's suffering if we don't really understand the causes for that
suffering.

When I first heard the Buddhist teachings and I heard somebody for the first time admitting and saying very directly that suffering is an inevitable part of life but also activating that wish for us to be free from suffering by saying that there is a path it was just an incredible relief.

Everyone around me had been saying what's wrong with you, why are you suffering? You've got nice friends, you're good at school, you're from a stable family and all the rest. But inside myself there was just this sense of not knowing why I was here not knowing the meaning of life and also the meaning of suffering and how to respond compassionately to that.

It was only really when I heard the Buddha's teachings that I felt like oh my goodness, now I understand that suffering can have a purpose and it can activate that wish to find a path. 

The Buddha wasn't so sadistic as to say: "you're bound to
suffer for the rest of your life". He actually did the opposite. He said: "there is suffering, this is how to look at it, how to regard it and suffering is to be understood".

Whenever people is Buddhism a philosophy, is it a a way of life, is it a religion, I always say no, actually it's a path.

It's a path that shows us suffering, it shows us the cause and it shows us the way out. And if we walk on that path we can attain complete freedom from
suffering. 

Do you believe that? Sometimes it's hard to see because the challenges increase. I found that in my own life
like I look back sort of to my time in the forest in a little kuti, with the sunrise and The Morning Dew. and the
kangaroos hopping by and think: "Oh! Life was so simple, I was so peaceful and now I have all these big responsibilities..."

Because I'm trying to extend my blessings and share the
understanding that I have with other people. So yes, it seems more burdensome. There's a lot more responsibility.

But there's also a lot of joy because I'm able to extend my own concern with Awakening to help other people and to build community. And sometimes it's easy to see
my mind is not always balanced, I get stressed, I get tired but then I have to recognize that 10 years ago I wouldn't have had the capacity to be in this situation.

So we can't measure our progress by what we feel sometimes... It's much nicer to measure progress by how much we can
serve, and how much gratitude and meaning we have in our lives. 

So we're shifting this idea of happiness from
being focused on feelings to being more focused on our values and how we're able to bring those into our daily life
there's a lovely quote: "invest in your values not your
feelings". That's just so succinct but very beautiful. 

The Buddha says that it's from lack of understanding the way things are that suffering arises. In AN 12.23 he goes through the whole sequence of what we call dependent origination, which shows how not knowing leads to being born. And when we're born it's inevitable that we suffer. 

So we have the suffering caused by birth and quite often in the Buddhist teaching that continues to more suffering. But here dependent arising of suffering is juxtaposed with something called "Dependent Liberation". 

So this is a juncture where suffering can either lead into more suffering or the suffering can lead to the way out of
suffering. 

Instead of going into sorrow and despair, birth and
death and the whole cycle continuing he says with suffering as a cause faith or confidence can arise.

Confidence here means inspiration in the Buddha's
teachings, in the fact that there can be some meaning found in this suffering. It can be a source of compassion, a source of wisdom. 

When I first heard the teachings it gave me such a high it carried me through years of practice and serving others,
giving me such a sense of meaning in my life, ultimately leading me to ordain. 

With faith or confidence as approximate cause gladness can arise with gladness as approximate cause
rapture can arise. And this is now in the
meditation arena.

With rapture as a cause Tranquilit arises. Tranquility is when we get very still in our practice our body starts to settle, our mind starts to quieten. With Tranquility as approximate cause happiness arises.

This is a different kind of Happiness. Most of what we think of as happiness is stimulation, excitement, it's something a little bit coarse. 

But this kind of happiness is arising from tranquility so it's like getting a taste of a different kind of joy. Then with happiness as approximate cause Samadhi arises.

Sometimes translated as concentration it really means a kind of quietening, a calming or stilling of the Mind. Things coming together, everything sort of
unifying. Whereas concentration gives this idea of something becoming quite small, narrow and condensed. 

With that Stillness as approximate cause the knowledge and vision of things as they really are arises.

This is the opposite of that delusion, it is seeing things in line with reality. With that as the proximate cause revulsion arises which is a strong translation of the word nibbida. 

But it's a great translation. Remember, this is coming from a very still, very quiet and pure mind but we just leave the things that are suffering aside. 

It's as simple as you know putting down a hot coal. 

Or say if you get something yucky on your fingers you don't think: "oh I should just be really peaceful with this, just have a look at how smelly it is, and just not wash it."

You would just wash it off, it's natural isn't it that you want to drop the hot coal, wash your hand and turn to something more beautiful.

So revulsion is a kind of turning away from the things that don't nourish, that don't bring peace and turning toward a path of peace.

And of course everything here is caused quite naturally by the previous one, and from there we get this dispassion or fading away. That just means those things fall away from our mental field. 

It's like if you're in a relationship that's toxic or even abusive, once you realize that you shouldn't preserve that relationship you try and find a different path, a way out. 

And when you do that thing fades away over time. That person leaves your life or you leave theirs, you're no longer
caught up with that anymore.

So the same thing happens here in the mind. Then with this dispassion or fading away as the approximate cause liberation arises and the knowledge of the destruction of
defilements. 

I think defilements is a bit of a strange word, I actually prefer the Tibetan word word which is the three poisons. It
basically means the roots of greed, hate and delusion.

So it means the uprooting of any tendency to to react anymore with greed, hate or delusion. Because there's no need to if you understand how things are.

I mean, you've got a choice, you can live in line with reality which is obviously going to happen if you've removed the defilements or poisons. Or, you can react and fight with reality. And that just makes more suffering, more
tension.

Then the Buddha ends this little uh teaching with a beautiful
simile. And this is a lovely simile to bear in mind for our practice because this whole practice is not about your ability to meditate and practice the teachings.

Nobody has a greater capacity than anybody else, it's all about a process of cause and effect and just learning to put those causes in place. 

So the Buddha says just as when the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountaintop, the water flows down along the sloped and fills the clifts the
gullies and the Creeks. These being full fill up the
pools which fill up the lakes. The lakes fill up the streams, the streams the rivers and as the rivers become full they fill up the great ocean. 

Then he goes through the whole sequence from delusion through birth to suffering and from there to confidence, joy, rapture, tranquility and the rest of Dependent liberation.

I think that's very beautiful and very positive message. So the Buddha's path is not just about suffering, there is also happiness.
